>>REGINA MEREDITH:
There are so few places
to turn to get any real
information on the economy
that I turn to Andy Hoffman
every few months to give us
an update as to what's going
on a global economic level.
Today, we'll talk about what
quantitative easing was really
about, how the Chinese are
printing more money than all
the central banks
combined, what that means,
the crashing of
the Indian rupee,
plus the real unemployment
numbers here in the US.
Andy welcome back.
It's always quite a
circus of information
when we get together because
so much as popping so fast.
It's almost like, how
can you put fingers
in all those dikes in the world?
How is it still afloat?
And why are we now
talking-- every time
I get the numbers from you.
Now we're looking at trillions.
It used to be millions when we
looked at deficits and trade.
Then it was billions.
Now, we're talking
commonly about trillions.
How is this possible
in a decade?
>>ANDREW HOFFMAN: Well,
I'll put it this way.
I write five days a week.
And I do three to four podcasts
and radio shows every week.
And again, there's
just no shortage
of what I call horrible
headlines to talk about.
Whether you're
talking about what's
going on in Europe or
Asia or, of course,
over here, and of
course what's going
on with the various
currencies in the world,
the geopolitical
strains, it really
is a 24/7 job to follow
all these things.
As for the -illions-- and I
remember when I was a kid,
>>REGINA: -illions.
>>HOFFMAN: --$1 million was a
lot of money even after tax,
or I should say even before tax.
Today, I think we're now
talking about quadrillions
when you talk about derivatives.
>>REGINA: Now, that's a
number that you don't hear--
>>HOFFMAN: So we're into the Qs.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you
don't hear people
talking about the quadrillions.
But when you get to the really
high numbers in finance,
the big picture, behind
the scenes stuff,
it is quadrillions.
>>HOFFMAN: Actually, the
Japanese national debt,
because their exchange
rate is 100 to 1,
is in quadrillions right now.
They just hit a quadrillion.
And of course, no one talks
about the derivative monster,
which is still there
larger than ever.
>>REGINA: No one talks about it.
No, you're right.
I wasn't even going
to ask you about it.
Because it's something that's
just kind of slipped away
with all the other bad news
that's riding above it.
Talk about that for just a
moment before we get rolling.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, remember since
2008, when the government,
and the banks-- when everyone
was taken by surprise,
they didn't realize that the
stupid things they were doing
would actually
come home to roost.
So the initial
reaction, of course,
was to print incredible
amounts of money
and, I say, liquefy the banks,
really just give the money.
And the other thing that
they did at the time
was, basically,
they said not only
we don't want to let
this happen again,
get taken by surprise--
meaning we'll give them
unlimited money,
which is what you have
with quantitative easing and
zero interest rate policy.
But we're also going to
rewrite the accounting rules.
And pretty much, we're going
to turn a blind eye to it.
The biggest accounting
rule change was in 2009.
It was April 2009.
So again, we're at the
height of the crash.
FASB, that's the Financial
Accounting Standards Board,
which is not a
government entity.
It's a trade union.
So they basically
sold their soul.
They sold their integrity,
kind of like a rating agency.
And they changed the
rules for banking
that said banks can now
value on their balance sheets
their assets, their bonds,
or whatever they would like.
So if they have something,
a bond that's worth $0.10
on the $1--
>>REGINA: Yeah,
it's a junk bond.
>>HOFFMAN: --they can
say we're valuing it
at par, at what it will
be worth at maturity.
And the same goes
for derivatives.
They suddenly one day reduced
the amount of derivatives
by 30% or 40% simply
with the stroke of a pen,
by simply saying we will
simply define it differently.
In fact, the new vogue
thing-- and we've
talked about economic data,
and we will in a second,
how everything is a lie-- is
GDP numbers around the world.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: We did it in the
states about a year ago.
We decided that any
research and development
should be considered GDP even
if it doesn't produce anything.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: Goodwill on purchases
should be considered GDP,
even though it doesn't
produce anything.
>>REGINA: So wait a minute.
Explain that.
Goodwill on purchases.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: What does
that even mean?
>>HOFFMAN: When a company buys
another company at a price
that's more than the value
on their balance sheet--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: --if they have a net
worth of $1 billion and they
pay $2 billion--
>>REGINA: Right.
That's called goodwill?
>>HOFFMAN: That asset
is called goodwill.
OK?
>>REGINA: OK.
>>HOFFMAN: And typically,
historically, most goodwill
is written off.
Because most acquisitions are
done at too high of prices.
But the point is that
the US government is now
considering all
these things that
really have no
value to be assets.
>>REGINA: Part of the GDP.
>>HOFFMAN: So now all of a
sudden the GDP gets marked up.
And the debt to GDP ratio, which
is what all of the mainstream
economists focus on-- they
say, oh well, their debt to GDP
is lower.
So obviously, they're
in better shape.
China just did the same
thing right after us.
And the best one
was this past week.
Nigeria just did it,
so much so that they
became the largest
economy in Africa.
And this is Nigeria,
which is one
of the most backward
places on the planet.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: So the fact is that
quadrillions, quintillions,
you name it, there's a lot
more going on behind the scenes
than you're being told.
>>REGINA: Well, yeah.
No kidding.
That's why we're
having you here.
OK.
We're going to go through some
of the primary players, what's
going on in those countries.
And then ultimately, we'll
end up at the US, OK?
So we're starting with China.
And I ask for your help on
this, just so everyone knows.
It's so confusing
I don't even know
where to begin on this
interview anymore.
So you've given me
some background data
on these countries.
So let's go ahead
and start with China,
what I said in the opening,
just sheer amount of printing
of money and what that's
going to do to us.
And what it's going
to do to them,
what it's going to do
to the global economy.
Let's talk about China.
>>HOFFMAN: Well,
the enigma of China
is that because
they've grown so fast--
and again, I use the word
grown with quotes around it.
Because a lot of such growth
is unproductive growth.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about
the unproductive part.
We know about the
stuff at Walmart.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
Well, the stuff at
Walmart is real growth.
>>REGINA: That's right.
>>HOFFMAN: They've take
our manufacturing jobs,
because they can
produce them cheaper.
>>REGINA: We've given
to them, haven't we?
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
>>REGINA: They didn't take them.
We gave them.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, it's
a little of each.
Because of course in time,
those jobs would've gone there.
Because they produce cheaper.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: They have a
billion and a half people.
And ultimately, if
their government
wants to feed the
people, that have
to give them the
means to do that.
One way is simple communism,
which doesn't work.
Another way is to
try to create jobs.
And the easiest thing
to do was to entice
jobs to come over seas.
And part of that was simply
greedy Western corporate titans
who lobbied Congress
to have all these
liberalized trade
deals, like China
being given the most
favored national status--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Favored status.
>>HOFFMAN: --even
though we theoretically
didn't agree with their
civil rights things.
Because a bunch of the companies
got a lot of money from that.
They got the cheap labor.
The problem is all
the jobs went away.
So the jobs would've
gone there in time.
But we really
accelerated that process.
>>REGINA: So we did.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
>>REGINA: But still,
those are assets.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
>>REGINA: You know,
that's some real growth--
>>HOFFMAN: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: --real
product, real exports.
Let's talk about
the hidden stuff
that we don't see that
is actually just not.
>>HOFFMAN: The
problem is when you
have a billion and a half people
is there is not enough jobs.
There'll never be enough jobs.
I mean, global population
growth is a problem everywhere.
I mean, when I was
a kid, there were
a few billion
people in the world.
I'm not that old.
There's 7 billion people now.
And then we're going to
talk about resources being
scant, food, energy,
and of course, gold.
So no matter what
the Chinese do,
they're never going to be
able to feed everybody.
There's going to have to
be some decisions made.
So one of the things
that they decided to do
was A, to peg their
currency to the dollar.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
The yuan.
>>HOFFMAN: People
don't realize that.
I mean, a lot of
countries have done it.
In fact, Hong Kong,
high profile economy,
has done it for years as well.
But for China to peg the
currency to the dollar--
when you peg a currency,
basically the way
you do it is you print money.
So every dollar the Fed prints,
the People's Bank of China,
the PBOC, they print yuan.
>>REGINA: And when you
say peg, is it a 1 to 1?
Or what is it?
>>HOFFMAN: No, it
was roughly 6 to 1.
>>REGINA: 6 to 1.
6 to 1 yuan to the dollar.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
And they've created
trading bands over it.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>HOFFMAN: So it
can theoretically
move, but very, very slowly.
>>REGINA: OK.
So 6 to the dollar.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
And in fact-- well,
if we skip ahead,
they just widened
the trading band.
Because they want to devalue
the currency further.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: But the
point is in doing
so, in pegging the
yuan to the dollar,
they brought a lot more jobs
than they would have brought
even with the cheap labor.
Because it makes the
cost of production
so much cheaper for
foreign companies.
And it distorts the
economy dramatically.
And then, of course, it
creates inflation within China.
Because they're
devaluing the currency.
Again, a billion and
a half people, they
have to buy things.
So major distortions.
>>REGINA: And they live so
marginally, in many cases,
anyway.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
And it's no different than
what we do here with the Fed.
>>REGINA: Right
>>HOFFMAN: But the thing is
we have to reserve currency.
So the effects of our inflation
are more like frogs in a pot.
We fill it slowly,
slowly, slowly.
But in other parts
of the world, that's
why we're having
these currency crises.
They fill it very, very quickly.
>>REGINA: Immediately.
>>HOFFMAN: That's why the Arab
Spring was the first to happen.
Because the Arab countries
spend the most percentage
of their income on food.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: And things that go up
first are the things, as I say,
you need versus want.
Food is first.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: But anyway--
>>REGINA: Well, you talk
about, also in China,
a shadow banking industry--
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
>>REGINA: --in this
real estate bubble.
And we know about
these cities that
have been built that are
essentially in nowhere.
And they're empty.
>>HOFFMAN: They're ghost cities.
>>REGINA: They're ghost cities.
>>HOFFMAN: And this
is the second part
of what we're talking about
with unproductive growth.
One, they've devalued
the yuan over time,
which has caused a
greater distortion.
More and more jobs have come
to China than would have come.
And more production of things
that aren't needed in the world
came out of that.
The second part
that they've done
is they have fostered an
unregulated banking system.
>>REGINA: What's that mean?
>>HOFFMAN: Here in the States,
we have a very badly regulated
banking system,
which favors the--
>>REGINA: The banks.
>>HOFFMAN: --too
big to fail banks.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: But in China, for
the most part, they have none.
They have no FDIC that
protects investors.
They have no real rules that
limit the amount of lending
or kind of lending,
fair practices,
and know your customer.
So what they've done,
part of their back door
QE, as I call it, particularly
since 2008, the market crash,
has been to foster this
private lending system.
It's gotten so out of control.
Because anyone who has done
some history on the Chinese
know that they like to speculate
more than probably any culture.
They have a history of it.
And since the government has
fostered this shadow banking
bubble, especially
since 2008, there's
been massive, massive
construction building
around the country of
ghost cities, of roads,
you name it, and
condos, et cetera.
So the proponents, the
people who really are not
understanding what's
going on, will say well,
it's really the Chinese
simply building out
their infrastructure, so
they can rule the world.
But the fact is most
of this building
has not come from the
government, which is healthy.
It's come from the corporations,
the private citizens,
which are now the equivalent
of the sub-prime situation we
had in the States.
They're all going broke.
They're starting to declare
bankruptcy, these companies.
They're looking at all
these empty houses,
these vacant condos,
these ghost cities.
And they realized that
they're just not needed.
And that's why the price of
copper has started to fall.
So there's a lot of
collateral damage going on.
And as you said
in the beginning,
they're printing more than
the other central banks.
Well, now it's coming out
that they are actually
overtly printing money.
In January alone, the PBOC
printed more than three times
than the Fed and the
Bank of Japan combined.
Because they
realized, oh my god,
we have to do something or
everything's going to crash.
>>REGINA: PBOC,
Peoples Bank of--
>>HOFFMAN: China.
>>REGINA: --China.
>>HOFFMAN: That's their Fed.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Right.
>>HOFFMAN: That's
their central bank.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: So
personally, I believe
that the crash that we're going
to see in China, real estate,
construction, credit,
will be historic.
It will make what's happened
in the Western world
in the last five years
look like nothing.
>>REGINA: Well, it seemed like
it was so illogical even when
it was under way.
Because, I mean, you
had all these crashes
throughout other
parts of the world.
Famous-- Miami.
Even places in
California, huge tracts
developed that are
half empty now.
But there was
infrastructure that
was developed alongside it.
It seems as though a lot
of these ghost cities
had no infrastructure,
barely roads leading
to them and nothing there
out in the middle of nowhere.
Boom, here's this huge complex.
>>HOFFMAN: When you
have bubbles blowing up,
people don't understand.
It's kind of like
at the top in 2000,
we theoretically reported
a government surplus here
in the States.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: In hindsight, a lot
of it was accounting gimmickry.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: But
for the most part,
it was a bubble
that was going on,
a brief bubble that
peaked and crashed.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: And the
same thing was there.
People saw, after 2008, all that
money printed for five years
everywhere.
Pushed stock markets up,
pushed housing prices up,
and gave people confidence,
especially in China
where their government
was promoting
this kind of speculation.
Whoa, we're past 2008.
Everything's great now.
And why not just
build more houses?
And same thing's
happening here, too.
Our real estate bubble
was created solely
with money printed
by the Fed and given
to private entities
in Wall Street.
And now that's turning
around and going down.
Right now, they
just reported we're
a 20 year low in
mortgage originations.
Refinancings have collapsed.
And that's pretty
remarkable given
that interest rates really
haven't moved up that much.
>>REGINA: No, no, no.
Not at all.
Right.
>>HOFFMAN: So it
just shows you how
limited, the diminishing
returns have become so small
right now, that they can
print a zillion dollars,
and it doesn't do
anything anymore,
except create an
ultimately larger crash.
>>REGINA: And with China, I'm
always so intrigued with China
in general because it's
such a different mindset.
Their population has to
be in decline now, because
of the practices of
infanticide and so forth.
And I mean, I know that
there is a ratio that
is skewing toward males
now as a result of that.
So what happens in that
country with what's
going on and a
declining population?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, you're asking
the right person, since I just
adopted from China last summer.
>>REGINA: A girl.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
And actually, I learned quite
a bit about the whole process.
>>REGINA: Tell us about it.
It's so intriguing.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, look, when
we went into the process
back in 2006-- it was an
18 to 24 month process.
And it took us seven
and a half years for it
to actually happen.
As it turns out, I firmly
believe that our daughter might
be one of the last healthy
girls to ever leave China,
and I mean ever.
Really?
Why?
>>HOFFMAN: First
of all, the list
had been slowing down
so much, I couldn't
believe it even happened.
But since we got her,
in July of last year,
the list hasn't moved at all.
And when we were in China,
she was the only healthy girl
of any the people we were with.
>>REGINA: Really?
>>HOFFMAN: Everyone was what
they called special needs that
had some kind of sickness
or illness or disability.
So they are no longer
allowing children
to leave-- healthy children
to leave the country.
And on top of that,
the girls are now more
valued than the boys.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: One, because
of the demographics
from the government standpoint.
But from the
people's standpoint,
it's not as agrarian a
culture as it used to be.
It's not everyone's a farmer.
Everyone's moved to the cities.
And as it turns
out, the boys have
been taught to spend money.
And the girls have been
taught to save money.
So as it turns out, girls are
now more valuable than boys
by far.
>>REGINA: Whoa.
So this is a total switch-a-roo.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And we had some
Chinese girls at our house
recently over from Beijing.
And we were talking to them.
And they said the government
was now even allowing-- permits
to have a second child.
But she said that
the equivalent-- she
was calculating.
>>HOFFMAN: For money.
>>REGINA: For money, was about
$60,000 to have a second child.
>>HOFFMAN: They've
essentially gotten rid
of the one child policy.
In fact, they just
had their meeting
called the third plenum
or the fifth plenum.
It's where they have these
giant government meetings, where
every aspect of government
meets every couple of years
and discusses every
vital topic And they just
had one maybe six months ago.
>>REGINA: OK.
So it changed then?
>>HOFFMAN: They
essentially, even
though just from our experience
it was pretty clear that it
was on the way out,
it really started
at the time of the Olympics is
when we saw the list slow down.
And I think part of that
was political in nature.
They're like, we
don't want to look
like we're giving
our children away
while the we're the
focus of the world.
But it's only gotten more so.
And at this fifth plenum,
whatever it's called,
they've essentially
gotten rid of the policy.
They've for some time now
allowed families within China
to adopt a second child,
which means there're not
as many being born, but they're
not leaving the country.
Because as you said, they
don't want the population
to decline too much.
And they also need to have
more girls in the country.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: And also on
top of that, you can buy.
I've heard it was more
like $10,000 or $20,000.
But $10,000 or
$20,000 in China--
>>REGINA: Oh, that's a
huge amount of money.
>>HOFFMAN: --is a lot.
>>REGINA: When she said $60,000,
I said, dollars or yuan?
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
It's dollars.
But $10,000 is a lot
of money in China.
>>REGINA: That's a lot of money.
>>HOFFMAN: It's probably
10 times that here.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: And not many
people can afford $100,000.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: But you know,
they need the girls.
And they need to correct
the demographics.
But they have said
that they believe
that there are 300 million
less people in China because
of doing this.
Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: I mean,
that's a good thing.
Like I said, there's
7 billion people.
I believe India's probably
larger than China.
>>REGINA: Yes.
So many mouths to feed.
>>HOFFMAN: The Middle
East is growing.
The Middle East is
having-- I think
the average woman has
six or seven children.
So for all we know,
50 years from now,
the Middle East will be the
next China as far as population.
>>REGINA: Right.
Interesting.
>>HOFFMAN: There's
just too many people.
>>REGINA: And meanwhile, you
have a beautiful little baby
girl that you get to love.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
>>REGINA: I know you adore her.
>>HOFFMAN: It
really is remarkable
how it worked out for us.
Because she is, so
far, a blessing.
>>REGINA: I know.
Silvie, the light of your life.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
So let's see, anything else on
China before we go to Japan?
>>HOFFMAN: No.
We got a lot to talk about.
>>REGINA: OK, all right.
So Japan, you talk about-- is
called eb-onom-- eb--onomics?
>>HOFFMAN: Abenomics.
>>REGINA: Abenomics.
What is Abenomics?
>>HOFFMAN: OK.
So Japan is the land
of the rising sun,
right, historically?
I call it the land
of the setting sun.
And I don't do it--
it's not funny.
But economically, they are
falling into the ocean.
I mean, they have a
long troubled history
of natural disasters.
So it's not uncommon.
That the fact that the
tsunami, and earthquake,
and the nuclear
disaster, the fact
that it's coming
just at the time
that Japan's economy
is falling apart
is no coincidence in my opinion.
Abenomics is named
after Shinzo Abe.
He is the Prime Minister.
He's been there for
about two years now.
And he made it under a policy--
He got in under
a platform of I'm
going to print even more money.
Remember, he was already
the Prime Minister in 2006
and '07 under that
same platform.
But it didn't work.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: So now he's
just doing it more.
Remember, Japan, they have
what I call demographic hell.
It was a piece I wrote.
They are the oldest
nation in the world.
In fact, the only
nation that's older--
I take it back-- is Monaco.
There's barely any people there.
And it's just old people
going to save on taxes.
>>REGINA: Casinos.
>>HOFFMAN: That kind of thing.
But they are by far the oldest.
Their population is 10
years older than hours.
I think the average
person is in their mid
to late 40s, which is incredible
for a first world nation.
Because you need young people--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: --to grow it.
So they experienced their money
printing bubble and bust 10
years before ours, 1989.
It's the same thing.
We're all in the fiat currency
system, same life cycle.
Everything happened
10 years earlier.
They had their 2000 in 1989.
And they've been
printing ever since.
So they've been the poster child
of what the rest of the world
will do, assuming the rest of
the world's financial system
holds up for another 10 years.
So they have the highest
debt in the world.
Tokyo has been the
most expensive city
in the world for
the past 15 years.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: And
yet, the propaganda
that comes out of
Japan is deflation,
which we've talked about before.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: They constantly
say deflation, deflation,
deflation.
It's a misnomer to start with.
Because deflation
means a contraction
of the money supply,
which certainly has never
happened in Japan and can never
happen under any fiat currency
system.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: And the
fact is, again, things
you want versus need.
Yes, they would love to
have their housing bubble
reflate to where it was in 1989.
It's about 70% lower
than it was from 1989.
So they say we have
deflation in the nation,
because their housing
bubble hasn't gone up again.
But the fact is that their food
prices, their energy prices,
are at record highs and soaring.
And when Shinzo Abe came into
office in December of 2012,
he immediately
instituted what is now
called Abenomics, which was
after 10 or 15 rounds of QE,
to double the money supply
in a two year period.
That started a year
ago in April 2013.
So here we are a year into it.
They just announced last
week a five year high
in their massaged, lower, CPI,
a nearly all-time high in energy
prices, nearly all-time
high in food prices.
Wages in Japan,
labor wages, have
fallen for 21 straight
months right now.
And GDP was zero.
And on top of that, when he
announced Abenomics a year ago,
he said part of
the way we're going
to pay for this program
is by instituting
an increase in the
national sales tax.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I mean, that's severe.
What was the sales tax,
say, 10 years ago in Japan?
>>HOFFMAN: Well,
I'll put it this way.
They instituted a
sales tax increase
in 1997, which then was
high-times for the world,
literally the peak
of the world economy.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: They went
from 2% to 5% then.
And Japan, while the
world was doing great--
it was fake great, but it
was great-- had a two year
recession as a result.
Now, with Japan
already collapsing
and the rest of the global
economy collapsing--
you like to talk about
the Baltic Dry Index,
it's had its worst
start to a year ever.
>>REGINA: Oh, yeah.
We're going to talk about that.
Let's talk about
that in a minute.
>>HOFFMAN: OK.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>HOFFMAN: Now, with
this, they just raised it,
starting April 1-- meaning
last week-- from 5% to 8%.
And on top of that, next October
it's going to go up to 10%.
>>REGINA: Double in a year.
>>HOFFMAN: And at
least, in 1996, '97,
going into that
sales tax increase,
there was a big
jump in spending.
People said I got to buy
stuff before they do this.
>>REGINA: Before
it goes up, yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, you
know what's happened now?
It's completely crashed consumer
spending going into this.
And actually, I just
read an article that
says the number one department
store chain in Japan
this week, because
it's been one week,
has had a 25% drop in
sales because of this.
>>REGINA: 25%.
>>HOFFMAN: So my
belief, firmly, is
that Abenomics is scheduled
to go on for another year.
I believe they're going to
increase it before then.
And I hold that Japan will
be the first first world
nation to experience
hyperinflation
in the 21st century.
>>REGINA: You know, one
of the things about-- I
want to go back to sales
tax, what that does
to exports and abroad and so
forth, with Japanese products
as well.
I don't know if it
affects anything.
>>HOFFMAN: Remember, part
of what they're doing
is they're trying
to devalue the yen.
That's what it's all about.
For the same reason--
>>REGINA: To keep themselves
viable in the market abroad?
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
Of course, again,
it's a misnomer
that getting those
jobs is a positive.
Because, yes, I
suppose Toyota will not
fire people if they
get more sales.
The problem is the money
that they earn is worth less.
So for the people who are
getting paid that money,
it doesn't really
help them that much.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: But from a
political standpoint,
they want to say
we're creating jobs,
so they continue
to devalue the yen.
I mean, they will say outright
our goal is to devalue the yen.
That, of course, pisses off the
Chinese, who devalue the yuan.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: You see all
these territorial disputes
they're having between the two.
It has nothing to do
with those territories.
It has to do with the anger over
what both countries are doing
to each other right
now economically.
>>REGINA: It's so interesting
because-- now, this is just
my naive point of view-- it
seems that both countries are
very tempered in a lot of ways
and have long term strategies
and use logic in the way they
structure their societies
and so forth.
But when it comes to
the world of economics,
it seems as though all logic,
everything that would normally
display itself in society
is thrown out the window.
And this is true globally.
But I mean, it's more
interesting to me
that it's happening in the East.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, Japan, is--
and, again, I don't even
know whether to use the word
capitalism anymore anywhere.
Because so many of
the things they're
doing are not capitalistic.
Just like there's almost
nothing capitalistic
left about America.
It's a couple of corporations.
It's what they call fascism,
where the government is
in bed with the
biggest corporation.
>>REGINA: Corporatocracy--
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: --in John
Perkin's terminology.
>>HOFFMAN: And then we have
the socialism thrown in there.
So who's doing anything
that's truly capitalistic?
But, yes.
Japan was certainly a model of
planning from a capitalistic--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: --standpoint
for a time.
Until, of course,
their market crashed
and the demographics
hit, in which case
they're turning into
a model of socialism.
And they're starting to do
incredibly non-capitalistic
business things.
Now, China's always
been communist--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: --in every
way shape or form.
And frankly, they
have to in some ways
because they have
so many people.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: There's not going
to be 1.5 billion jobs in China
no matter what they do.
>>REGINA: Right.
It makes sense, sure.
>>HOFFMAN: But of
course, it creates
the same kind of problems.
They don't have a
wealth of resources
like some other countries do.
So they're going
to have to continue
to find ways to get those
resources into the country.
And printing money to do
that creates inflation.
And it's just a vicious loop.
So the point is they all
have long term hopes.
But right now,
nothing is working.
At least they're buying gold.
They know we have to
get rid of our reserves.
>>REGINA: Yeah, they're
buying a lot of gold.
>>HOFFMAN: So
they're buying gold.
Because in the next
version, when we finally
go back to a gold
standard, which
is the only type of
money that works--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: He who
has the gold wins.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: It you will be
the Chinese, the Russians.
The problem is for people
who think-- a lot of people
say, well, the Chinese,
they're being smart.
They're buying up all
this gold, because they're
going to convert
the yuan to gold.
And it'll be all good.
No, no.
China's economy is going
to crash, as I said,
harder than any of them.
And the Chinese government
that benefits from the gold
backed yuan being
reserved currency
will not be any of these guys.
These guys want to
protect their jobs.
But they won't.
It'll be new people.
So it's not like they're
looking out for the future.
They're looking
out for themselves.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Well, that's true globally.
>>HOFFMAN: Absolutely.
It's no different than
what happens with the Obama
administration, the Bush
administration before it,
the coming Clinton
administration, the coming Bush
administration, the coming
Clinton administration.
See, I'm reading that.
And it looks like it might
be Clinton against Bush.
>>REGINA: Oh, I know.
Again.
Heaven forbid.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
So let's see.
Japan, I think
that's kind of where
we were going to go on that.
And then Europe, we
wanted to go to Europe.
Oh, no, the Baltic Dry Index.
>>HOFFMAN: OK.
>>REGINA: I want
to talk about that.
Because to me, that's one of
those really kind of basic meat
and potatoes indicators.
>>HOFFMAN: Right.
And we've talked
about it before.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: It's
kind of a follow up.
And again, I caveat anything
with the Baltic Dry Index
with there are two
components of it.
One is the actual demand.
>>REGINA: Well, explain
what it is again for people.
>>HOFFMAN: The
Baltic Dry Index is--
and again, I'm not
an expert on this.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: But
for the most part,
it's an index that measures
global tanking activity--
tanker activity.
>>REGINA: Moving products
around the planet.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
It puts together a
bunch of variables,
including prices on
tankers, as they called it
the day rate, and also
the amount of movement.
But there are some
things that can affect it
that are not necessarily
demand driven.
For instance, there
was a big building boom
maybe 10 or 15 years ago,
which temporarily caused supply
to jump up.
So prices could-- the Baltic
Index could go down a bit,
but not necessarily because
the economy's falling.
>>REGINA: Right.
Right.
>>HOFFMAN: I believe
we're past that right now.
>>REGINA: So all
things being equal,
it's moving stuff
around the planet.
>>HOFFMAN: All
things being equal.
And I don't think
that that big building
boom is a factor at this moment.
But right now, I see that it's
had it's-- it's very seasonal.
If you look at it, it
looks like this every year.
Kind of like, let's
say, gold demand,
because you have the Chinese
New Year and the Indian
the Indian wedding season.
So you do have some--
or the weather here--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: --with retail sales.
So there are some changes.
But we're seeing now that
the beginning of this year,
we're four month into the year,
is the biggest drop it's ever
had ever in the
beginning of a year.
And the second biggest drop
in the beginning of a year
was 2012.
So we're talking about when
you look back in history
and some of the worst
declines in history are now.
>>REGINA: You're talking,
I think you said earlier,
25% drop for the first
quarter of this year?
>>HOFFMAN: I was just
reading about it today.
I think that's about right.
>>REGINA: That's huge.
>>HOFFMAN: We're not
at the all-time low,
which was about the 2009, 2010.
But I firmly believe
we'll get there.
But the fact is the
seasonal trends--
just like the fact is we're not
at an all-time high at gasoline
prices here in the US.
But we are at an all-time
high for this time of year.
Because it's not
the driving season.
>>REGINA: Right.
Exactly.
>>HOFFMAN: I mean, it's
pretty darn high right now.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it is.
>>HOFFMAN: But think of
what it could look like.
Oil's up $5 a barrel
the last two days.
So I mean, we could be looking
at all-time high gasoline
prices this summer.
And it's during, basically,
a horrific recession,
which is another thing
we're going to talk about.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
Let's go to Europe, GDP,
unemployment numbers
in Europe, young people.
Not a lot of work
for young people.
>>HOFFMAN: Europe is the
craziest-- the whole Euroland--
Eurozone experiment,
the euro currency,
is the craziest mad experiment
I've ever seen in history.
It's a prototypical example
of doing stupid things
at the peak.
Like, we talked
about the Chinese
starting this epic
construction boom
just because the banks
propped the stock market up
for a couple years to
ridiculously unsustainable
levels.
Well, if we talk
about that, we have
to go to the
creation of the euro.
OK?
1999 was the
creation of the euro.
It was at the quote, "height
of the global economy."
Where, even though it
was a ridiculous idea
to start with to put together
22 countries with histories
of hating each other,
speaking different languages,
having completely different
economic variables affecting
them, and different mindsets,
but because, for a brief moment
in history, just like the
US reported a brief surplus,
for a brief moment,
the politicians
thought we can look like
brilliant politicians
and be feted around
the world for doing
this great thing of putting
all the European countries
together.
And they created these-- what
do you call them-- criteria
for what the countries would
all have to do economically.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: You have to have
a GDP, a debt of x% of GDP,
and all these things.
And for the first few
years-- actually, they never
had them all meeting
those criteria.
But a few of them did.
And the rest were reasonably
close in the beginning.
So they said, see it's
all going to work out.
And of course, that was
the peak right there.
And since 1999 when
the euro started,
it's been all downhill.
And of course since 2008,
it's really been downhill.
And as we speak here,
European unemployment
is at an all-time high.
European, as you say,
youth unemployment,
which is under 25--
it's people under 25,
is an astonishing
24%, which is probably
what our real unemployment
rate is in this country.
But in some countries, these
pigs, as they call them--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: Again, first
world countries-- Spain,
Italy we're talking
about-- 50%, 60%--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: --of the people
under 25 don't have jobs.
That's why people
don't buy cars anymore.
That's why everyone
lives at home.
I mean, we are regressing.
Talk about society
is regressing.
And of course, while all
the while this is going on,
GDP has flattened
out to nothing.
Debt has exploded.
Deficits have exploded.
And the amazing thing
is back in 2012,
we had a second 2008,
2009 type thing in Europe.
All the countries are
crashing, the stock markets,
the bond markets.
So Mario Draghi, who's
the new head of the ECB,
he came in around then.
Former Goldman Sachs, of course.
He said in July, 2012,
I will do whatever
it takes to save the euro.
And then he followed up.
And believe me, I can do it.
So immediately
everyone said, they're
going to do QE at some
point, so don't worry.
So now, they've created
this ridiculous bubble
in sovereign European bonds.
If you could believe--
Greece, Spain we're
talking about right now.
Their economies,
remember how bad
it was three, four years
ago with all the bail outs?
Their economies
are much worse now.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: I mean,
much, much worse.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: Their GDP growth
is massively negative.
Their debt is much
higher, not a hope
and a prayer of paying back
anything that they owe.
And yet, their bonded yields
have gone down dramatically,
clearly because people
are expecting this QE.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: QE, yeah.
>>REGINA: I think you
also said that they
are looking toward more
austerity measures.
How can you be anymore austere?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, it's a joke.
Because it's like telling a
child to do something and they
don't do it.
And you keep saying, well,
all right, I'll punish you.
And you don't punish them.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: I mean,
at some point, Greece
and all these countries with the
bail outs know that they're not
going to be kicked out.
Because if they ever
kicked Greece out,
Greece has $500 million
of debt-- billion of debt.
And on top of that, all the
derivatives that would get
unleashed.
So they just say stop doing it.
Stop, stop.
But they know they can
never kick them out
because you know who
owns the Greek debt?
The French banks,
the German banks.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: So they can't do it.
>>REGINA: They
can't kick them out.
>>HOFFMAN: And then
you have the IMF,
which is kind of a group of
European and American bankers
that they pretend on
one side of the mouth,
"Yes, we need more austerity,
so we can get more loans."
And then the other side
of the mount they say,
"We need you to print more
money and lower interest rates,
because everything
is collapsing."
So it's just become
such a mess over there.
And finally, they
took interest rates
slowly but surely down to zero.
>>REGINA: Right.
0.25% or something.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah, 0.25%.
Of course, they're
waiting for the markets
to have their next fall before
they make the Draconian measure
of taking that quarter
percent away as if it matters.
>>REGINA: Yeah, yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: They finally
said at their meeting
last week that they are now
modeling a $1.4 trillion
QE program, which
I knew they would.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: And at
some point, probably
at the same time that Abenomics
is doubled, they will say, yes.
We're launching-- it's called
the OMT, the Outright Monetary
Transaction program.
It's been sitting there waiting.
Who knows what they're
doing behind the scenes?
But it's been waiting
in front of the scenes.
And they will do it.
And then, of course,
the coup de grace
will be when Janet Yellen
admits that tapering is a lie--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: --and
turns it right around
and starts QEing at
an even greater rate.
>>REGINA: Right.
Right.
OK.
So now a lot of times
we read about Germany.
Germany's saying, how
did we get in this mess?
We're responsible
citizens in this gig here.
And every now and then
you hear, hey, they'd
like to release
themselves from the euro.
>>HOFFMAN: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Go back to the Deutsche mark.
Is this actually happening?
Do you see a potential where
the euro itself will fail
and countries will go back
to their initial currencies?
>>HOFFMAN: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
I mean, they're going
to eventually have
to be gold backed currencies,
because they're all
fiat currencies.
But it goes back to
this dirty shirt theory.
Who has the least dirty shirt?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: OK?
Because to say that the
Germans are conservative
is like saying Republicans
are fiscally conservative.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: Or that
the Chinese government
are brilliant
economic tacticians.
They're not.
They're just in better
shape than Greece.
They do have an export industry.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: They do have a better
financial condition than Greece
for whatever that's worth.
But the fact is it's a fiat
currency if it was left alone.
And they have a
terrible economy,
which is also
going nowhere fast.
>>REGINA: Well, they have
since the absorption of Eastern
Block--
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: --in East Germany.
>>HOFFMAN: They are
being pulled down.
There's no doubt that
these countries, the pigs,
the southern Europe,
are an anchor which
they would love to get rid of.
But again, they've lent so
much money to these countries.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: Again, you
can't just get rid of them.
>>REGINA: No.
>>HOFFMAN: Because they
will pull them down.
It's like the Titanic
split, the bottom came,
and then it pulled-- there's
no way of avoiding it.
So people will want
to think, oh yeah,
the Chinese can just go at it.
The Germans, all they have
to do is get rid of Greece
and they'll be fine.
No.
Everyone will go through
the painful correction
no matter how hard they try.
And some countries may be
better equipped for it.
But what you see
China-- not China.
What you see Germany
doing now is they've
been aligning themselves with
the Chinese and the Russians
with trade deals
more so than ever.
And by the way, they need them.
You see what's going
on in the Ukraine.
Europe gets a quarter of all
its natural gas from Russia.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: A lot of it
goes through the Ukraine.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: So there's
politics going on, too.
>>REGINA: And then
Ukraine, meanwhile,
is fighting to get into
the European Union.
>>HOFFMAN: Some of it is.
Some of it is fighting
to get back into Russia.
>>REGINA: The real
Ukrainian population
before the infiltration by
the Russians into their land.
Yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: But the fact is
the Germans are at least
smart enough to see the
writing on the wall.
And they have been slowly but
surely aligning themselves
with the eastern powers that
will eventually be the leaders.
>>REGINA: Well, smart.
What about India?
You say the rupee is crashing.
And this whole thing about gold.
I mean, gold is so key in
just the everyday culture.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
>>REGINA: And so
they're now using--
they've installed some bans
and tariffs on gold and silver
transactions in that country.
What's happening there?
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
India has always been the
largest gold importer,
gold user, gold everything.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: And there's
no-- probably-- aside fro--
after the Chinese-- or I should
say just ahead of the Chinese,
the Indians are the culture
that values real money more
than any, going
back historically.
If you ask anyone but but the 1%
bankers what their net worth is
in India, they won't say rupees.
Instinctively, you
will say dollars.
I own $1 million of worth.
I have a half a
million dollars' worth.
You're even calculating,
oh, I have a house.
But no, no.
The house is worth x.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: Indians
don't talk that way.
They think in terms of real
items of value, as I call them.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: On a monetary
basis, it's gold.
Their jewelry is--
>>REGINA: Jewelry is
in each household.
>>HOFFMAN: So the way
that I've-- you know,
what you've seen in the world is
everyone has gone on this fiat
currency standard.
They all let Bretton Woods be
broken by the United States
in 1971.
They went along with it, because
a bunch of bankers said sure.
We can get the short term
benefits of all the money
printing, and that is until
the credit card got charged up,
which is where we are now.
But that included the Indians.
And the way that
I put it-- India,
the way I describe it
is it's no different
from a financial perspective
than South Africa
was under apartheid from
a minority perspective.
You had a small minority
of white people governing,
oppressively, a large
majority of non-white people.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: And
look what happened.
And that's why it's ironic.
Mandela dies and a lot
of people are going,
well, Mandela really
wasn't a good guy.
He did a lot of killing
himself and all this.
And I go, Mandela was
fighting for his rights.
And whether he was-- whether
there was any killing involved,
I don't know.
But the fact is the
white people were
killing all the black people.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>HOFFMAN: So they
were killing them back.
>>REGINA: Well, so how
does this relate to India?
>>HOFFMAN: And in India you have
a billion and a half people who
value gold as money--
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: --ruled by a
handful of Western loving,
Fed lackeys that print money.
And they destroy the
national currency.
And they've created
massive, massive inflation.
>>REGINA: So how does it help
them to put tariffs on gold
to the average person?
>>HOFFMAN: Exactly.
So not only have they created
massive food inflation-- again,
we go back to Arab Spring.
The Indians are among the
highest percentage spenders
of their income on food.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: So they have
had some of the worst food
inflation in the world.
And it's one thing
to say you have
food inflation in
a small country.
But in a big country
when you have a billion
and a half people, it's created
some major social problems.
To the point where the
government has just
created an open-ended deal
where they're giving out
almost free rice to like 900
million people, which they
have to buy on the open market.
But they're helping to
inflate the cost up.
So they may not be able
to afford to do this.
So it's kind of on the edge.
But anyway, one of
their propaganda schemes
that they started about--
literally about a year ago--
actually, two years
ago, if you remember,
there was a big jewelry strike.
Because they were
banning the importation
of gold for jewelry.
And the jewelers
actually won that battle.
>>REGINA: But I
don't understand.
Why are they doing this?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, anyway,
a year ago the rupee
really started crashing hard.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: And they
in a propaganda scheme
said the reason the
rupee is crashing
is because everyone
is buying gold
and causing our current account
deficit to balloon, which
theoretically is why
the currency's falling,
which is the most ridiculous
thing I've ever heard.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>HOFFMAN: I mean, yes.
It is a fact, current
account deficits
ballooning is bad for currency.
But bringing gold
into the country
is good for the currency.
>>REGINA: That's
part of the culture.
That's intrinsic to the culture.
>>HOFFMAN: That's
good for a currency
if you bring in-- that's why the
Chinese government encourages
its people to buy gold.
It's good for the currency.
But anyway, as part of
this ridiculous scheme,
starting last year they started
to put huge import tariffs
on gold and silver.
>>REGINA: What is a huge
import tariff for example?
>>HOFFMAN: It was 2%.
They took it up
to 10% in August.
>>REGINA: Wow.
>>HOFFMAN: And on top
of that, they even
banned, for most of the
banks, the importation of gold
for the purposes of
selling to the public.
They actually banned
a lot of the banks
from selling coins altogether.
>>REGINA: I'm
surprised there's not
rioting in the streets over
that alone no less the food.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, what it caused
was a massive black market
to develop to the point where
actual gold sales actually
increased, because
of that black market.
And then I was
actually shocked to see
the final numbers for 2013.
Even with those import
tariffs, the amount
of imports of gold
into the country
was barely lower than the
record levels from '11 and '12.
And on top of
that, silver-- yes,
it had a 10% tariff as well.
But silver is cheaper.
So there were people who said,
well, I'll just buy silver,
because it's cheaper.
Silver imports were 20%
higher than the record year.
And now on top of that, they
had elections in December.
And the ruling party, which
is called the Congress
Party, ironically, was
voted out everywhere.
So now you have the national
Prime Minister election
coming up next month.
And everyone knows that
this Congress party
is going to get their butt
kicked by what's called the BJP
Party, who has a leader
who's very pro-gold.
So all of a sudden
they're now talking about,
well, I think maybe we'll
get rid of these tariffs
because we've changed our
mind, when really they
just want to get votes.
But either way, my guess is
black market or not, they're
going to get rid of all
those tariffs at some point
in the next year or two.
>>REGINA: Well, yeah.
It makes sense.
>>HOFFMAN: And, of course, that
means even more buying of gold.
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
On to the fragile five.
>>HOFFMAN: Right.
Well, the fragile five,
India would be one of them.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: It's a
term that came up--
came around probably
about a year ago
last summer, because another
propaganda misnomer is
this every time
currency's fall, they
say it's an emerging
markets crisis.
It's just one of their catch-all
terms that kind of tries
to downplay it and
say, well, it's
really only these bad countries,
these horribly managed
countries.
It couldn't possibly happen
in the United States.
But the fact is
what we're seeing
is all currencies have been
falling against the dollar.
And the dollar's been falling
against real items of value,
which is why we're having
huge price inflation in food
and energy and all these things.
But basically, if you look
at when this all started,
2008 is when the big, as I say,
money printing orgy started.
That was the "save
the world" thing.
And for a couple a
years it seemed to work.
Because the stock
markets recovered.
And confidence recovered a bit.
And some people might have
even spent some money.
Right?
I remember when George Bush
was sending checks out saying,
go and spend it
and be patriotic.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: So for
a couple years,
it was kind of
everyone was saying,
well, I guess maybe it worked.
Right?
But then by 2011 or so,
the world was realizing it
wasn't working,m and the Arab
Spring had already been caused.
Because, again, all
that money printing
went right to the countries
that spend food the most.
And then, of course,
as I said in 2011,
Europe started to fall apart.
Heck, we had our
S & P downgraded
in the United States.
And there was a real
crisis going on.
So that-- I think
it was at that point
where the central banks of
the world realized, holy cow.
All that stuff from '08, all
that money printing didn't work
at all.
Our only hope right now
in this Ponzi scheme,
which has to get bigger,
is to double up, triple up,
quadruple up, and just
manipulate the markets even
more, and put out
more propaganda.
And that's what they've done.
That's when QE was birthed.
Well, first it was--
in this country
it was Operation Twist, which
was really a back door QE.
And then, of course,
at the end of 2012,
they initiated QE
three and four.
Abenomics, they started
talking about in 2012
and initiated right afterward.
And in Europe, they did
something called the LTRO, Long
Term Refinancing Operation,
which really meant
printing money and
giving it to the banks.
So then you really saw the
money printing go crazy.
That's when you've seen the
spike in the money supply.
And as a result, major
exportation inflation
around the world.
So not just the Arab Spring, but
it's starting to go everywhere.
>>REGINA: It is
a global economy.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
>>REGINA: You know, people
can argue against globalism.
But it is.
>>HOFFMAN: So the
average currency
has fallen by 30% against the
dollar in the past three years.
Pretty much when, as I said,
Operation Twist and all the QEs
started.
The dollar-- again, we
have major inflation here.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: But those
countries have it
when they're importing as
well as within the country.
So they're having major
social unrest, major problems.
I mean, Venezuela is a
great example the way
they are hyperinflating
right now.
But you're seeing
it in Thailand.
Ukraine was another country
where you've seen that happen.
Kazakhstan, Turkey, Brazil,
Argentina, you name it.
It's spreading, all this
exportation of inflation.
India perfect example.
The fragile five
referred to five
of the larger of
these currencies which
were falling like this.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: Because again,
these five countries,
India, Indonesia, Brazil,
South Africa, and Turkey,
is where 24% of the
world's population lives.
So we're talking about out
of control food inflation
for a quarter of
the world's people.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>HOFFMAN: And again,
they stabilized them
with a lot of currency
intervention back last summer.
I mean, overt, it was out there.
It says Brazil intervening.
And it stabilized.
And sure enough, we've
now had another one
in the last month or two
where those currencies started
plunging again.
Brazil was another one.
Argentina, Indonesia,
you've seen it again.
And so here we are with
this more intervention.
And at the same time
this is happening,
you now have Japan
accelerating Abenomics
depressing their currency.
A major, major announcement
was a couple weeks ago
when China announced
that they are
widening the band on the yuan.
So they could devalue
their currency.
>>REGINA: Oh, goodness.
OK.
>>HOFFMAN: Now, we have here the
euro bank talking about a 1.4--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: So the point is
it's only going to get worse.
>>REGINA: We're going
to talk about the US
before we wrap it up.
Is there any place on the
planet that's actually doing OK?
I mean, is Bhutan, or
is anyone doing OK?
>>HOFFMAN: Well,
it's all relative.
I mean--
>>REGINA: I guess if
you're still close to--
>>HOFFMAN: I can't
speak for Bhutan.
>>REGINA: If you're still
an agrarian culture,
and have a fairly closed loop,
and maybe live in a village
on a hilltop that can
provide for itself--
>>HOFFMAN: I would say, yeah.
I would say probably
some of the OPEC nations
by virtue of high oil prices.
>>REGINA: Well, that's true.
>>HOFFMAN: But they're
not all doing well.
Because they have
been mismanaged.
And they all concentrated
the wealth at the top.
And then there are ones like
Venezuela, OPEC nation, fourth
or fifth largest producer.
It's in hyperinflation,
because again fiat currencies
are mismanaged by everyone.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about the US,
speaking of mismanaged
fiat currencies.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about our real numbers,
our employment
numbers and so forth.
>>HOFFMAN: Remember, we have the
reserve currency of the world,
at least for now.
I mean, you see the
announcements out there.
It's gonna be gone soon,
just like every reserve
currency before it.
But because we've
had it, it's allowed
us to do some of
these horrible things
that everyone else is doing and
not have as Draconian effect.
We have record high food stamps.
We have record low labor
participation rate.
We have record low real
wages, all these things.
But we don't have all out
social unrest like in Venezuela
just yet.
>>REGINA: Right.
And I have here the numbers.
You say labor participation
is at a 35 year low.
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
>>REGINA: I mean, adjusted to
population growth relatively.
>>HOFFMAN: No.
I mean the actual
percentage of people--
>>REGINA: Really?
>>HOFFMAN: --yeah-- is that low.
It's down to where it was
in the late '70s, which
is when women started
entering the workforce.
So you think about on apples
to apples, it's even worse.
Because that's a
time when people
were surging into
the labor force.
And by the way, the
women-- again, you
talk about all the
misnomers in history.
Women didn't surge into labor
force in the '70s and '80s
because of women's lib and
they were all dying to work
and being equal.
They did it because, in 1971,
we went off the gold standard,
inflation surged, and
all of a sudden families
couldn't survive on one income.
>>REGINA: That is right.
>>HOFFMAN: That's what
happened in my family.
My mother was a-- well, now
you can't say housewife.
You have to say a
stay-at-home mom
until she went back to school
and got a real job in 1980.
>>REGINA: My mom, too.
Same thing.
>>HOFFMAN: Because we
couldn't afford the same life
with all the inflation.
>>REGINA: Very true.
>>HOFFMAN: But the point is
we're back at that level now.
And the unemployment rate would
be probably four times what
it is if they didn't publish
it in such a ridiculous lie.
>>REGINA: Right.
Yeah, the way they manipulate
those numbers is criminal.
>>HOFFMAN: Yeah.
I mean, the real number is
probably 25 plus percent.
And right now we have a
record low real wages.
They keep falling and
falling and falling,
which means now you need
three people in the household
to support you.
>>REGINA: Well, and you're
saying real inflation
is at about-- running
on average 8% to 9%.
And we can expect 20%
inflation on food in 2014
in the US when we just
went through roughly
that over the last year or two.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, I
can't say exactly what
food prices will do in 2014.
I know that the food indices,
the agricultural price indices,
are up 20% just in
the last three months.
And a lot of that already
has gone into the stores.
And some it will lag.
But you know, we're at all-time
high beef prices, milk prices,
chicken prices--
>>REGINA: All the proteins.
>>HOFFMAN: --bacon
prices across the board.
And of course, now we
have these droughts
in California and Brazil.
I mean, in California,
they produce
I think 2/3-- I
have some charts--
2/3 of all the produce
in this country.
And in Brazil, which
is having an equally
bad historic drought,
I mean, that's
a half of the world's
sugar and a quarter
of the soybeans, which
are in everything,
and a third of the coffee.
So you have all
these things that
are kind of coming together
as the world is accelerating
its money printing.
And by the way, it's
getting harder and harder
to grow food, to mine
gold, to produce oil.
>>REGINA: Well,
let's talk about-- we
only have a couple minutes left.
Now, this is a whole thing.
So you left Wall Street.
You're into gold,
silver, hard assets.
I mean, that is
your background now.
That's what you believe in.
I agree with you.
But because of what's
going on in the economy,
it's becoming very-- and
because of the suppression
of gold prices, it's
becoming very difficult
for the mining companies to
stay alive and even continue.
So what's that mean when
you have these incredibly
suppressed prices and at
the same time very high
demand and limited
supplies going on?
What's going to
come out of that?
>>HOFFMAN: Well,
the perfect example,
again-- the reason
I'm so good at what
I do is because of all the
various backgrounds I've had.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: I was an oil analyst
on Wall Street for 10 years.
Not just a guy doing
bank stocks, I did oil.
I went on rigs.
I did all the studies of how
much it costs to produce oil.
And back then, oil was $20 a
barrel when I left in 2005.
Maybe it was $25 a barrel.
All the analysts were predicting
it would go down to $20 and $15
forever.
But the fact is the low
hanging fruit, as we call it
in the extraction
business, is quickly--
was quickly taken away.
The Gulf of Mexico, the
shallow stuff, is gone.
So they went deeper and deeper.
I was-- I did--
Deepwater rigs was
a big thing of mine.
I was on the Deepwater
Horizon, the rig that blew up.
And the fact is, it
blew up because it
was trying to do
things, to find oil
where they could
never find it before.
And they drilled into a place,
which is very high pressure.
And they didn't realize it.
It's so expensive to
drill oil that the Saudis
need $80 oil right now.
Saudis used to need $5 oil.
So the growth curve of
prices has been exponential.
And that goes for
any new technology
that people get excited about.
At one point it
was the tar sands,
much more expensive
than people thought.
And now the new
thing is fracking.
Oh, it's going to save America.
No, not really.
If it was really saving
America, and we've
had a huge increase
in production,
how come the price of
gasoline is at all-time highs?
And now they're finding out that
it costs a lot more to frack
than they thought.
>>REGINA: Yeah, exacly.
>>HOFFMAN: It causes more
environmental damage.
And by the way, it
depletes more quickly
than they thought, which
means more expensive.
So the fact is in the
oil business, where
you have a cartel supporting
prices, this is what happened.
And now in the gold
business, you've
had the cartel dramatically
attacking prices
for 15 years to the
point where, I mean,
all you have to do is
look at the numbers.
I mean, the mining industry
lost, I think, $40 billion
last year.
And this is a group with a
market cap of $3 billion.
They wrote off a quarter to
a third of all their assets.
And they've cut
their CAPEX in half.
Production of gold
peaked in 2002.
>>REGINA: OK.
So really quickly, because
we're about out of time--
>>HOFFMAN: Yes.
>>REGINA: --what does that mean?
Are we going to have
a more difficult time?
People who want to kind of flee
to silver, gold, and so forth,
copper or whatever, is it
going to be more difficult?
>>HOFFMAN: Right now, the paper
prices don't tell this story.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>HOFFMAN: They are
suppressed more than ever.
And the physical demand, as we
talked about India and China,
is at an all-time high
accelerating, not just
going up, accelerating rapidly
from all-time high levels.
>>REGINA: Still a
good idea then if you
can get your hands on
any silver or gold?
>>HOFFMAN: What will
end the bull market,
as we say at Miles Franklin,
is the lack of supply.
If you don't have it--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>HOFFMAN: --you're
never going to get it.
>>REGINA: OK.
So just a shining word
of good news anywhere?
We all have each other, right?
>>HOFFMAN: Well, the good news
is you can protect yourself.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: And not
just financially.
You can do so by
preparing for the worst
and hoping for the best.
>>REGINA: As always, yeah.
>>HOFFMAN: And in my world,
I'm in the financial world.
I don't talk about
the other things.
I say you still can
buy gold and silver now
below the cost of production
while it's still available
and protect your
family and your future.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And I always say at this point,
and grow a garden or something.
>>HOFFMAN: Well, that too.
It's a good thing to do.
>>REGINA: Yes, indeed.
Thank you so much, Andy.
We'll check back in another
four to six months--
>>HOFFMAN: I look forward to it.
>>REGINA: --see how
thing are progressing.
That was a belly full
of economic news.
And it all comes down to
staying alert and taking
care of the basics.
This isn't meant to alarm
anyone, only to educate.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.